#9332 5.13 release notes (#9379)
IQSS/dataverse: doc/release-notes/5.13-release-notes.md

- `service payara stop`
- `rm -rf $PAYARA/glassfish/domains/domain1/generated`

3\. Start Payara

- `service payara start`

4\. Deploy this version.

- `$PAYARA/bin/asadmin deploy dataverse-5.13.war`

5\. Restart Payara

- `service payara stop`
- `service payara start`

6\. Reload citation metadata block

   `wget https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/releases/download/v5.11/citation.tsv`
   `curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/datasetfield/load -X POST --data-binary @citation.tsv -H "Content-type: text/tab-separated-values"`
- Add the updated citation.properties file to the appropriate directory

7\. Replace Solr schema.xml to allow multiple production locations and support for geospatial indexing to be used. See specific instructions below for those installations without custom metadata blocks (1a) and those with  custom metadata blocks  (1b).

Note: with this release support for indexing of the experimental workflow metadata block has been removed from the standard schema.xml. 
If you are using the workflow metadata block be sure to follow the instructions in step 7b) below to maintain support for indexing workflow metadata.

7a\.

> For installations without Custom Metadata Blocks:

Reviewer: The updates look good to me. Would it be useful to make this "without Custom or Experimental Metadata Blocks" to mirror 7b?

Author: yup. will do.

### Advanced Database Settings

You can now enable advanced database connection pool configurations useful for debugging and monitoring as well as other settings. Of particular interest may be `sslmode=require`. See the new [Database Persistence](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/5.13/installation/config.html#database-persistence) section of the Installation Guide for details. (PR #8915)

### Support for Cleaning up Leftover Files in Dataset Storage

Experimental feature: the leftover files stored in the Dataset storage location that are not in the file list of that Dataset, but are named following the Dataverse technical convention for dataset files, can be removed with the new [Cleanup Storage of a Dataset](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/5.13/api/native-api.html#cleanup-storage-of-a-dataset) API endpoint.

### OAI Server Bug Fixed

A bug introduced in 5.12 was preventing the Dataverse OAI server from serving incremental harvesting requests from clients. It was fixed in this release (PR #9316). 

## Major Use Cases and Infrastructure Enhancements

Changes and fixes in this release not already mentioned above include:

> - Administrators can configure an alternative storage location of generated temporary files. (PR #8983)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Administrators can configure an alternative storage location where files uploaded via the UI are temporarily stored during the transfer from client to server. (PR #8983, See also [Configuration Guide](http://guides.dataverse.org/en/5.13/installation/config.html#temporary-upload-file-storage))
```

- To improve performance, Dataverse estimates download counts. This release includes an update that makes the estimate more accurate. (PR #8972)
- Direct upload and out-of-band uploads can now be used to replace multiple files with one API call (complementing the prior ability to add multiple new files). (PR #9018)
- A persistent identifier, [CSRT](https://www.cstr.cn/search/specification/), is added to the Related Publication field's ID Type child field. For datasets published with CSRT IDs, Dataverse will also include them in the datasets' Schema.org metadata exports. (Issue #8838)
- Datasets that are part of linked dataverse collections will now be displayed in their linking dataverse collections.

## New JVM Options

The following JVM options are now available:

- `dataverse.personOrOrg.assumeCommaInPersonName` - the default is false

> - `dataverse.files.uploads` - alternative storage location of generated temporary files

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `dataverse.files.uploads` - alternative storage location of generated temporary files for UI file uploads
```

### API Endpoint Listing Metadata Block Details has been Extended

The API endpoint `/api/metadatablocks/{block_id}` has been extended to include the following fields:

- `controlledVocabularyValues` - All possible values for fields with a controlled vocabulary. For example, the values "Agricultural Sciences", "Arts and Humanities", etc. for the "Subject" field.
- `isControlledVocabulary`:  Whether or not this field has a controlled vocabulary.
- `multiple`: Whether or not the field supports multiple values.

See [Metadata Blocks](http://preview.guides.gdcc.io/en/develop/api/native-api.html#metadata-blocks-api) in the API Guide for details. (PR #9213)

### Advanced Database Settings

You can now enable advanced database connection pool configurations useful for debugging and monitoring as well as other settings. Of particular interest may be `sslmode=require`. See the new [Database Persistence](http://preview.guides.gdcc.io/en/develop/installation/config.html#database-persistence) section of the Installation Guide for details. (PR #8915)

### Support for Cleaning up Leftover Files in Dataset Storage

> Experimental feature: the leftover files stored in the Dataset storage location that are not in the file list of that Dataset, but are named following the Dataverse technical convetion for dataset files, can be removed with the new [Cleanup Storage of a Dataset](http://preview.guides.gdcc.io/en/develop/api/native-api.html#cleanup-storage-of-a-dataset) API endpoint.

Reviewer 3: convetion -> convention

Author: Thanks!

4\. Deploy this version.

- `$PAYARA/bin/asadmin deploy dataverse-5.13.war`

5\. Restart Payara

- `service payara stop`
- `service payara start`

6\. Reload citation metadata block

   `wget https://github.com/IQSS/dataverse/releases/download/v5.11/citation.tsv`
   `curl http://localhost:8080/api/admin/datasetfield/load -X POST --data-binary @citation.tsv -H "Content-type: text/tab-separated-values"`
- Add the updated citation.properties file to the appropriate directory

7\. Replace Solr schema.xml to allow multiple production locations and support for geospatial indexing to be used. See specific instructions below for those installations without custom metadata blocks (1a) and those with  custom metadata blocks  (1b).

7a\.

For installations without Custom Metadata Blocks:

-stop solr instance (usually service solr stop, depending on solr installation/OS, see the [Installation Guide](https://guides.dataverse.org/en/5.13/installation/prerequisites.html#solr-init-script)

-replace schema.xml

cp /tmp/dvinstall/schema.xml /usr/local/solr/solr-8.11.1/server/solr/collection1/conf

-start solr instance (usually service solr start, depending on solr/OS)

7b\. 

> For installations with Custom Metadata Blocks:

Reviewer: Or experimental ones?

Author: I highlighted the change to workflow support in the section on the schema.xml updates. Please take a look to see if you think it's adequate and understandable.

- edit the following line to your schema.xml (to indicate that productionPlace is now multiValued='true"):

    `<field name="productionPlace" type="string" stored="true" indexed="true" multiValued="true"/>`

- add the following lines to your schema.xml to add support for geospatial indexing:

    `<!-- Dataverse geospatial search -->`
    `<!-- https://solr.apache.org/guide/8_11/spatial-search.html#rpt -->`
    `<field name="geolocation" type="location_rpt" multiValued="true" stored="true" indexed="true"/>`
    `<!-- https://solr.apache.org/guide/8_11/spatial-search.html#bboxfield -->`
    `<field name="boundingBox" type="bbox" multiValued="true" stored="true" indexed="true"/>`
    `<!-- Dataverse - per GeoBlacklight, adding field type for bboxField that enables, among other things, overlap ratio calculations -->`
    `<fieldType name="bbox" class="solr.BBoxField"
           geo="true" distanceUnits="kilometers" numberType="pdouble" />`

- restart solr instance (usually service solr start, depending on solr/OS)

> ### Optional Upgrade Step: remove Workflow Schema fields from Solr index

Reviewer: Won't this happen in step 7?

In Dataverse 5.12 we added a new experimental metadata schema block for workflow deposition.
We included the fields within the standard Solr schema we provide. With this version, we
removed it from the schema. If you are deploying the block to your installation, make sure to
update your index.

> If you already added these fields, you can delete them from your index when not using the schema.

Reviewer 4: Also, could somebody please rewrite/clarify this sentence. If I understand it correctly (a big _if_), the words "delete from your index" in it mean "delete from your Solr schema", and then "when not using the schema" really means "if you are not using this metadata block". It did confuse me, because we usually don't call metadata blocks "schemas", and because we are talking about solr schema in the same paragraph... 
I am kinda slow of course... but I can see how it may confuse another admin - ?
